
Since the arrival of the 21st century, wireless technologies have seen a continuous growth in every aspect: wholesales, users, manufacturers, standardization, etc. This success has promoted their constant evolution, and they stand at the time of writing as the most widespread access alternative. However, there is still a big challenge that has not been properly tackled: while it is clear that the present and future of communications are tightly related to wireless networking,
the mainstream transport protocol nowadays, TCP, used for countless applications (for instance, file transfers, web browsing, etc.), is severely jeopardized when used over this type of networks.
One alternative to overcome the aforementioned limita- tion is the use of the Network Coding (NC) paradigm. It is a relatively new technique (originally proposed in 2000) that basically proposes to move away from the legacy routing procedures, which rely on the well-known store-and-forward paradigm, where intermediate relay nodes do not incorpo- rate any additional processing, but they just forward the incoming packets based on the information of their routing tables. Opposed to this, NC follows a di↵erent approach, where routers, taking an essential role, are able to modify the content of the packets across the network, by means of di↵erent coding schemes. Using this new approach, a broad range of possibilities looms: it may reduce the number of transmissions, thus leading to energy saving; it might bring about a more reliable service; it also can be used to incor- porate additional security mechanisms (the information is somehow encrypted); it finally can be used to improve the performance, among other features.
In this work we study the possibilities that are brought about by NC to boost the performance for reliable com- munications (traditionally using TCP), in particular over Wireless Mesh Networks (WMNs). For that we follow two di↵erent approaches, both of them based on a common NC framework that we integrated within the ns-3 simulator [3] (namely, ns-3.13): first, we have implemented a solution based on the deterministic encoding of packets belonging to di↵erent TCP connections at the intermediate routers along the network (Inter-flow NC ); on the other hand, we also ex- ploit the combination of UDP and a Random Linear Cod- ing (RLC) scheme that “mixes” datagrams belonging to the same UDP flow to promote a novel reliable communication service. We assess the performance of these mechanisms over two di↵erent canonical topologies and compare their behavior to the one achieved by the legacy TCP.


Communication networks today share the same fundamental principle of operation. Whether it is packets over the Internet, or signals in a phone network, information is transported in the same way as cars share a highway or fluids share pipes. That is, independent data streams may share network resources, but the information itself is sepa- rate. Routing, data storage, error control, and generally all network functions are based on this assumption.
Network coding [2] is a recent field in information the- ory that breaks with this assumption. Instead of simply forwarding data, nodes may recombine several input pack- ets into one or several output packets. A simple example in a wireless context is a three node topology, as shown in Figure 1. Linear network coding, in general, is similar to this example, with the difference that the xor operation is replaced by a linear combination of the data, interpreted as numbers over some finite field. This allows for a much
larger degree of flexibility in the way packets can be com- bined. In addition to the throughput benefits evidenced in this example, network coding is also very well suited for for environments where only partial or uncertain information is available for decision making. Similar to erasure cod- ing, successful reception of information does not depend on receiving specific packet content but rather on receiving a sufficient number of independent packets.
Linear combining requires enhanced computational capa- bilities at the nodes of the network. However, according to Moore’s law, processing is becoming less and less expensive. The bottleneck has shifted to network bandwith to support the ever-growing demand in applications and QoS guaran- tees over large unreliable networks. Network coding utilizes cheap computational power to increase network efficacy.
The goal of this paper is to make the basic concepts of net- work coding available to the networking community.1 Sec- tion 2 explains what it is and how it can be implemented. Section 3 discusses existing results on the performance ben- efits of network coding. Section 4 reviews proposals to use network coding in information and networking systems.